# Bachelor Project Proposals

# Termination Analysis
A common programming mistake is to write an unintentional infinite loop. 
Most contemporary programming languages such as C, C++, C#, Java, Kotlin, Scala, etc. do not help programmers avoid such issues.
Termination analysis or termination checkers describe a wide-range of techniques that can be used to verify that a program 
(or part of a program) always terminates, for any input. These techniques range from sophisticated type systems to the use of
SMT solvers. In the case of functional programming, such termination checkers may try to ensure termination by verifying that recursion is always on structurally smaller elements. 

The aim of this project is to explore the design space of termination analysis for a functional language.
The work will include reading papers, language design, and implementation in a real-world programming language.

### Literature
- Andreas Abel: Termination Checker for Simple Functional Programs

Contact: Magnus Madsen <magnusm@cs.au.dk>




# Type-Safe Compilation
The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) is the most popular, widely-used run-time environment and JIT-compiler on the planet.
Numerous languages, including Scala, Kotlin, Clojure, etc., compile to JVM bytecode and run on the JVM.
However, the JVM bytecode format is intricate and compiling to JVM bytecode is error-prone. 
For example, the JVM is stack-based machine, and so to perform e.g. addition we push two integers on the stack,
and perform the IADD instruction which pops both operands and pushes the sum. However, it is easy to mistakenly 
generate JVM bytecode such that say the stack contains only one integer before the IADD instruction, leading to crashes at run-time.
What we would like is a library / embedded DSL that ensures that the JVM bytecode generated by a compiler satisfies
(some of) the properties of the JVM bytecode language.

The aim of this project is to explore the design of a library for type-safe code generation of JVM bytecode.
The work will include reading papers, language design, and implementation in a real-world programming language.

### Literature
- Johannes Rudolph, Peter Thiemann: Mnemonics: type-safe bytecode generation at run time

Contact: Magnus Madsen <magnusm@cs.au.dk>




### Uniqueness / Ownership Typing 
Resources, such a raw memory, file handles, sockets, database connections etc. must be carefully managed to ensure 
correct use and to ensure they are released when no longer needed. In languages such as C and Java, it is to
a high-degree the responsibility of the programmer to ensure such correct use. For example, in C it is easy to forget
to free memory or to free memory twice, whereas in Java it is easy to forget to close a file stream.

Programming languages such as Rust and Clean attempt to address these issues with uniqueness / ownership type systems.
In these languages, the type system tracks the use of a resource and ensures that it accessed correctly and released
at an appropriate time. 

The aim of this project is to explore the design space of uniqueness/ownership typing for a functional language.
The work will include reading papers, language design, and implementation in a real-world programming language.

### Literature
- Walker, David: Substructural type systems. Advanced Topics in Types and Programming Languages
- Clarke, David G., John M. Potter, and James Noble: Ownership types for flexible alias protection

Contact: Magnus Madsen <magnusm@cs.au.dk>
